IntroductionHigh blood pressure, or hypertension, affects more than one in four adults globally and is a major modifiable risk factor for morbidity and mortality.1 Internationally, guideline based approaches to pharmacotherapy for hypertension have been adopted to simplify clinical practice and improve blood pressure control.234 Although some evidence suggests that the effectiveness of drug treatment for hypertension does not differ across the general population,56 guideline recommendations hinge on the understanding that the effect of these drugs differs among specific subpopulations.In the United Kingdom (UK), National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines recommend angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ACEI/ARB) as first line treatment for hypertension in people younger than 55, and calcium channel blockers (CCBs) for people without diabetes aged 55 and older, replacing CCB with thiazides for those with drug intolerance.2 The presence of an age based recommendation is unique among major international guidelines for hypertension treatment,34 and is based on differences in the activity of the renin-angiotensin system with age.789 Since this threshold was introduced in the first iteration of NICE hypertension guidance in 2004, the evidence base for hypertension treatment in older age, including the use and safety of ACEI/ARB drugs in older populations has evolved.1011Furthermore, in NICE guidelines, use of CCB or thiazides is recommended as first line treatment for black people of African or Caribbean ethnic origin (referred to in this article as black people to reflect diversity). The same drugs are recommended, after consideration of comorbidities, in international guidelines.234 The pathophysiology of hypertension in this population has been thought to differ importantly from people of white heritage; lower levels of renin result in a reduced response to hypertension drugs that block the renin-angiotensin system such as ACEI/ARB.12 However, treatment recommendations based on historical categorisations of ethnicity have recently been criticised, because ethnicity can be considered a social construct rather than a biological one, and the proportion of people with mixed ethnic heritage has increased.13Contemporary routine care is characterised by an increasingly older, more ethnically diverse and multi-morbid population. For people initiating hypertension drugs, it is not known whether current age and ethnicity based treatment recommendations translate to greater blood pressure reductions in these settings.The Quality and Outcomes Framework in the UK ensures that blood pressure is regularly measured and recorded in patients’ electronic health records in primary care.14 Along with complete information on drugs prescribed, these anonymised data are a rich and high quality resource for examining drug effectiveness.15 Therefore, framing our questions around the current NICE algorithm for drug treatment of hypertension, we sought to determine whether initiation of CCB compared with ACEI/ARB led to differences in blood pressure reduction across age and ethnicity groups.MethodsDataWe conducted a cohort study using the Clinical Practice Research Database (CPRD-GOLD) linked to Hospital Episodes Statistics. CPRD-GOLD is a nationally representative repository of prospectively collected, anonymised electronic health records from primary care in the UK, which has been extensively validated.16 It holds data on demographic information, health related behaviours, test results including blood pressure measurements, diagnoses, and prescriptions for more than 11 million people.16 The Hospital Episodes Statistics database records all hospital admissions for patients covered by the UK’s health service who receive treatment from either English NHS trusts or independent providers.17 Almost 60% of general practices included in CPRD-GOLD are linked to Hospital Episodes Statistics.16 We used linked data in this study to improve completeness of ethnicity recording.18Cohort entryWe identified new users of hypertension drugs (CCB, ACEI/ARB, and thiazides), defined as people who had a prescription for one of these drugs in the study period (1 January 2007 to 31 December 2017), with no previous use of these drugs in the preceding year. People entered the cohort (index date) on the date of the first prescription. People were eligible for inclusion from the latest of the following: study start date (1 January 2007), one year after general practice registration (to allow time for recording of covariates in the general practice record), the date when the general practices’ data recording processes were considered of adequate standard to be included in CPRD-GOLD, or the person’s 18th birthday. People remained in the cohort until the earliest of the following: end of the study period (31 December 2017), last data collection from the general practice, date of leaving the general practice, or death.ExclusionWe sought to study the association between first line drug treatment for hypertension and blood pressure solely in those individuals treated for hypertension. Therefore, we excluded people who initiated any of the study drugs without recorded blood pressure measurements in the year before cohort entry, and those whose blood pressure was at target or lower (<140/90 mm Hg, according to current NICE guidelines).2 We also excluded people who initiated more than one hypertension drug on the index date, as well as those with diabetes at baseline (because current NICE guidance recommends ACEI/ARB as first line hypertension treatment for all people with diabetes). Additionally, because ethnicity was a stratifying factor, we excluded people whose ethnicity was not determinable even after data linkage.OutcomesOur main analysis looked at the change in systolic blood pressure from baseline at 12 weeks, 26 weeks, and 52 weeks, and repeated this for diastolic blood pressure in a secondary analysis. We included two types of control analyses: a positive outcome control and a negative outcome control.1920 The rationale of positive outcome analyses is that they demonstrate whether known drug-outcome associations can be replicated in a dataset. If such associations cannot be found, this could indicate confounding or problems with the data or methods. We included the following positive outcomes: incidence of ankle swelling, gout, and angioedema, all outcomes that we would expect to occur with different incidence according to drug prescribed. We also included a negative control outcome; herpes zoster. Our rationale in this instance was that none of the hypertension drugs studied should be causally associated with an altered risk of herpes zoster. If an association was found between any drug group and herpes zoster, this would suggest confounding or bias.20CovariatesBaseline values of systolic and diastolic blood pressure were taken from CPRD-GOLD, measured on or as close as possible to the index date. Using a priori knowledge about factors that could influence treatment choice or response we defined multiple covariates: age, sex, smoking, alcohol use, body mass index, diabetes, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, arrhythmia, peripheral vascular disease, cancer, depression, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Chronic comorbidities were defined using records from information recorded in both CPRD-GOLD and Hospital Episodes Statistics using all available data. We determined whether each person had ever previously been prescribed statins, antiplatelet agents, proton pump inhibitors, insulin, and loop diuretics. To capture polypharmacy, we measured drug treatment use from multiple British National Formulary chapters in the year before index date. To capture health service use in the year before index date, we determined how often a person visited their general practice. To account for socioeconomic status, we used person level deprivation based on the 2010 English Index Multiple Deprivation scores, separated into five equal groups, using quintiles. We calculated baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate from the most recent creatinine value recorded in CPRD-GOLD within one year before index date using the CKD-EPI (Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration) equation. This variable was categorised into five groups: no CKD (estimated glomerular filtration rate ≥60), stage 3a (45-59), stage 3b (30-44), stage 4 (15-29), and stage 5 (<15).To retain power in our main analysis, we imputed missing data under the missing-at-random assumption. Data for renal function were approximately 30% missing; our previous work has shown that people without recorded renal function have similar health outcomes to those with normal renal function after adjusting for covariates such as age, diabetes, and vascular disease.21 Data for other variables (smoking, alcohol, and body mass index) were approximately 5% missing. The imputation model included all explanatory variables listed above, including the outcome variable (first measurement of systolic and diastolic blood pressure during follow-up). We conducted diagnostics using the midiagplots function in Stata.22 We created five imputed datasets and combined treatment effects across these to obtain one overall estimate in each of our analyses.23AnalysisReflecting current NICE guidance,2 we sought to answer two specific research questions in relation to blood pressure reduction. Firstly, in non-black people who do not have diabetes, is CCB versus ACEI/ARB for hypertension associated with different reductions in blood pressure in those younger than 55 versus those aged 55 and older? And secondly, in people who do not have diabetes, are CCB associated with different reductions in blood pressure than ACEI/ARB by black or non-black ethnicity? We also compared use of thiazides versus CCB to give insight into drugs that are recommended as alternative choices.2Therefore, among new users of ACEI/ARB or CCB, within each of four groups defined by age (</≥55) and ethnicity (black/non-black), we estimated the propensity to be prescribed CCB versus ACEI/ARB using a logistic regression model including all the covariates listed above, except for diastolic blood pressure. Then, within each group, we matched one CCB user to one ACEI/ARB user on their propensity score within a caliper of 1%. We used linear mixed models to model change in systolic blood pressure with a random intercept for each person and fixed effects for exposure drug, using splines over time to allow the effects of exposure to vary flexibly over time. The fitted model was used to predict the blood pressure value at each follow-up (at 12 weeks, 26 weeks, and 52 weeks), so did not require patients to have measurements taken at those particular time points. In this way, the model could accommodate unbalanced data.24 Furthermore, this type of model can accommodate correlations within each person for longitudinal blood pressure measurements. The same analysis was used to compare thiazides versus CCB.We used Cox proportional hazards models for the control outcomes within each of the propensity score matched groups defined above. For the gout and ankle swelling outcome models, we observed violation of the proportional hazards assumption. For these outcomes, we also modelled time specific hazard ratios. To reduce the risk of type I error with multiple testing, we defined a priori that we would report 99% confidence intervals.Subgroup and sensitivity analysesTo look more closely at CCB versus ACEI/ARB and thiazide versus CCB in reducing systolic blood pressure according to age in a non-black population that did not have diabetes, we used finer age categories for group specific analyses (age <55, 55 to <60, 60 to <65, 65 to <70, 70 to <75, and ≥75) and propensity score matched within each age group. We studied reductions in blood pressure associated with thiazide-like diuretics (indapamide and chlortalidone) versus CCB and also older thiazide agents versus CCB.Our main analysis represented an intention-to-treat approach, so we also carried out an as-treated analysis whereby we censored follow-up blood pressure data if participants switched to or added another hypertension drug or discontinued their drug, defined as no repeat prescription within 90 days of previous prescription. This analysis aimed to examine the results for time spent on the drug initiated rather than the duration of follow-up that could include other drugs or no drugs. We carried out a complete case analysis to explore the impact of our multiple imputation approach. Finally, as a post hoc addition, we repeated our main analysis with 95% confidence intervals.Patient and public involvementNo patients were involved in setting the research question or the outcome measures, nor were they involved in developing plans for design or implementation of the study. No patients were asked to advise on interpretation or writing up of results.ResultsFrom more than 1 million users of hypertension drugs between 2007 and 2017, we identified 87 440 new users of ACEI/ARB, 67 274 new users of CCB, and 22 040 new users of thiazides (fig 1). People taking thiazides were more likely to be female and were older than users of other hypertension drugs, while people taking ACEI/ARB group had a higher prevalence of myocardial infarction, heart failure, and diabetes (table 1). People without a blood pressure measurement during one year of follow-up were dropped from the blood pressure analysis (n=10 840). Demographics and comorbidity profiles were similar between those with and without blood pressure measurements Comparison with the literature and other studiesNICE guidelines recommend ACEI/ARB as the first line treatment for hypertension for those younger than 55.2 This age threshold, currently absent in international guidelines, is based on the idea that hypertension in younger people is more commonly characterised by high renin levels.78 The age cut-off point in NICE guidelines is supported by studies limited by small sample size (<60 people)78 and short follow-up periods (<6 weeks),78 restricted to men9and geographical location,7 and including unpublished data.25 To support drug recommendations in those aged 55 years and older, three trials are cited in the NICE guidance although none show clear effect modification by age (usually categorised as age <60/>60 or <65/>65) for any included clinical outcome.262728 Our age stratified results are in line with a meta-analysis of 31 trials including more than 190 000 patients, which showed no difference in blood pressure reduction or cardiovascular events for any hypertension drug class between patients aged younger or older than 65.29 Our result of no difference in effectiveness between CCB and ACEI/ARB in new users aged 55 and older also accords with the results of a randomised study that examined effectiveness of first line treatment for lowering blood pressure between people aged younger than 55 and those aged 55 and older.30Since first including 55 years as the age threshold in NICE guidance (CG18) in 2004, the literature has evolved to capture older populations with subgroup analyses based on older ages (comparison threshold at age 75) or subgroups defined by frailty.1011 In our subgroup analyses, greater reductions in blood pressure were found for CCB versus ACEI/ARB use only in those aged 75 and older. This finding could reflect an increased prevalence of isolated systolic hypertension in this subgroup (57% for age ≥75 v 40% for age ≥55 in our data), for which CCB might be more effective.3132 Although our results suggested no clear benefit in blood pressure reductions for CCB compared with ACEI/ARB in people aged 55 and older, the range of side effects might be as important as drug effectiveness in considering which hypertension drug class to prescribe. This decision is particularly important in older patients whose higher prevalence of comorbidities such as advanced chronic kidney disease could favour the use of CCB.International guidelines for hypertension are similar to NICE guidelines in that ethnicity is a major consideration in the choice of a first line hypertension drug, although they do not use the algorithmic approach of UK guidance. Ethnicity based recommendations are supported by strong evidence from the ALLHAT randomised clinical trial, which showed use of thiazides or CCB was more effective than ACEI/ARB at lowering blood pressure in black people.28 We have suggested above several reasons why our results might differ from established clinical evidence. However, the value of making clinical decisions based on ethnicity is increasingly questioned given the growing proportion of people who classify themselves as multiethnic or of mixed heritage.13 Furthermore, our understanding of interactions between genetic and environmental factors in the development of hypertension is improving.33 Thus, the value of using categorisations of ethnicity as a proxy predictor for drug response is uncertain in current society, although is likely to be informed by ongoing research.34ConclusionIn conclusion, we observed reductions in blood pressure for CCB that were similar in magnitude to those for ACEI/ARB in people aged above and below 55. This finding suggests that some people aged 55 and older who are currently offered CCB, but have indications for renin-angiotensin blockade such as proteinuria, could be missing the therapeutic benefits of ACEI/ARB. We found no evidence that CCB new use was associated with larger reductions in blood pressure than ACEI/ARB new use among black people versus other ethnic groups, although power was limited and uncertainty existed in the estimate. Our results suggest that the algorithm for choice of pharmacotherapy in UK NICE guidance could be simplified. Moving towards a choice of any of the three major hypertension drug classes with suggested compelling indications for their use would align the UK with international guidance, in particular with regard to age.Worldwide, about 22% of women of reproductive age used hormonal contraception in 2019.1 In the United States, 35% of women of reproductive age used hormonal contraception in 2015-17.2 Although male condoms and oral contraceptives remain the most commonly used methods in North America and Europe,1 long acting reversible contraceptive methods have become increasingly popular.2 Long acting reversible contraceptive methods include intrauterine devices, implants, and injectable contraceptives.3 In the US, 2% of women aged 25-34 used long acting reversible contraceptive methods in 1995 compared with 13% of similarly aged women in 2015-17.23 In Europe, 9% of women of reproductive age reported that they used long acting reversible contraceptive methods in 2019.1Most research on the use of contraceptives and fertility has focused on the effect of oral contraceptives on fecundability; the average probability of pregnancy during one menstrual cycle for a couple engaging in regular intercourse without contraception. Several studies reported delays of about three months in return of fertility after stopping oral contraceptives.456 In some57 but not all studies,4 women who used oral contraceptives for long periods had greater fecundability than women who used oral contraceptives for shorter periods. Less is known about the association between the use of other methods of contraception and fertility, however. Recent use of intrauterine devices (copper and hormonal methods combined) was associated with a slightly longer time to conception than use of barrier methods.68 The results are conflicting,49 however, and could be confounded by parity or underlying fecundity because previous indicators of fertility could affect the choice of contraceptive and the probability of conception in the future. One study indicated that recent use of injectable contraceptives might be associated with delayed conception.4 Most studies examining less common contraceptive methods have been small489 or retrospective in design, with a risk of recall bias.68 Given the increasing popularity of long acting reversible contraceptive methods and other alternatives to oral contraceptives, more research into their short and long term effects on fertility is needed.This investigation was designed to examine fecundability in relation to recency and length of use of various hormonal and non-hormonal contraceptive methods, in three large preconception cohorts. The cohorts were from three prospective studies from North America and Denmark of women and men planning pregnancies.MethodsStudy populationWe pooled data from three prospective cohort studies of participants planning pregnancies: Snart Gravid, a Danish study of women planning pregnancies, aged 18-49 (2007-11); Snart Foraeldre, an extension of Snart Gravid that included male partners (2011-19); and Pregnancy Study Online (PRESTO), a North American study of women planning pregnancies, aged 21-45, and their male partners (2013-19). Recruitment for Snart Foraeldre and PRESTO is ongoing. Participants in all studies were recruited mainly by advertisements on social media and health related websites, such as Facebook and Netdoktor (www.netdoktor.dk, a well known Danish health related website).1011For example, we used the following advertisement on Facebook to recruit participants for PRESTO: “Trying to conceive? Help scientists learn more about fertility. Enroll in an online research study.” The recruitment methods for the study have been described in detail elsewhere.101112Enrollment and primary data collection were done by email and through the study website. Eligible women were not pregnant, did not use contraceptives, were not receiving fertility treatment, and were trying to conceive. We excluded participants if they reported insufficient or implausible information on their menstrual cycle (Snart Gravid 5%, Snart Foraeldre 8%, PRESTO 2%). We also excluded participants who had been trying to conceive for more than six menstrual cycles at study entry; excluding these participants reduced potential recall bias (that is, differential recall and reporting of exposures and covariates resulting from reduced fertility) and possible confounder misclassification, which might arise if women who had been trying to conceive for longer than six cycles changed their behavior as a result of not conceiving before entering the study. The proportions of women excluded because they had been trying to conceive for more than six cycles were 22% in Snart Gravid, 25% in Snart Foraeldre, and 20% in PRESTO. Participants whose last method of contraception was not included in the present analysis (sterilization that was subsequently reversed, emergency contraception, and douching) were also excluded (<1% of participants). A total of 17 954 participants were included in the pooled analyses: 4435 from the Snart Gravid study, 4768 from the Snart Foraeldre study, and 8751 from PRESTOAll questionnaires were completed online. At baseline, participants reported exposure and covariate information, including personal characteristics, lifestyle factors, and medical history. Follow-up questionnaires were done every two months for 12 months or until a pregnancy was reported, whichever came first. More than 80% of participants completed at least one follow-up questionnaire.All participants provided online informed consent.Assessment of contraceptive useAt baseline, participants reported the contraceptive method used most recently before they tried to conceive (“Which birth control method did you use most recently?”). Categories included barrier methods (condoms, diaphragm, sponge, foam (Snart Gravid and Snart Foraeldre studies only), jellies, creams, and suppositories), oral contraceptives (progestin only and combined), hormonal intrauterine devices, copper intrauterine devices, patches, injectable contraceptives, vaginal rings, implants, and natural methods (withdrawal, avoiding sex when fertile, calendar methods, and monitoring cervical mucus or basal body temperature). Those who used hormonal methods recently were asked if they waited for a period of time after stopping hormonal contraception before trying to conceive (“Did you wait a few months after stopping hormonal contraception before trying to get pregnant?” If yes, “For how many months did you wait between stopping hormonal contraception and trying to get pregnant?”). To evaluate the potential effects of recent use of hormonal contraceptives, participants who reported waiting longer than one month before trying to conceive after stopping hormonal contraception were categorized as users of barrier or natural methods based on their questionnaire responses. Participants in the Snart Foraeldre and Snart Gravid studies selected only one “most recent” contraceptive method, but participants in PRESTO could select more than one method. Those who reported that they used both hormonal and barrier methods were categorized as users of the hormonal method, and those who reported that they used both barrier and natural methods were categorized as users of barrier methods. Participants who selected more than one hormonal method were categorized based on their reported ages when they stopped.In PRESTO, participants reported the total number of hormonal contraceptive types they had used in their lifetime (oral contraceptives, rings, implants, injectable contraceptives, patches, hormonal intrauterine devices), the name of each method, and their ages when they started and stopped each method. Length of use (years) was calculated separately for each type of hormonal contraceptive. In the Snart Gravid and Snart Foraeldre studies, a detailed history of length of use was collected only for oral contraceptives.Assessment of fecundabilityWe collected data on menstrual cycle dates and pregnancy status from the baseline and follow-up questionnaires. At baseline, participants reported the typical length of their menstrual cycle, the date of their last menstrual period, and the number of menstrual periods they had since they began trying to conceive. At each follow-up, women reported the date of their last menstrual period, whether they were pregnant, and whether they had started fertility treatment. In the PRESTO cohort, we also identified pregnancies in participants lost to follow-up by linking to birth registries, searching for baby gift registries and birth announcements online, and contacting the participants directly. We calculated pregnancy attempt time, rounded to the nearest whole cycle, as: (number of menstrual cycles participants had been trying to conceive at baseline)+[(date of last menstrual period from most recent follow-up questionnaire−date of baseline questionnaire)/cycle length]+1.Assessment of covariatesAt baseline, participants reported their age, height, weight, smoking history, education, household income, and frequency of intercourse; length of their relationship; whether they were trying to improve the chances of conception (eg, timing intercourse to their fertile period); length of the menstrual cycle and regularity; parity; history of infertility (previously tried to conceive for ≥12 months); history of physician diagnosed endometriosis, uterine leiomyomata, polycystic ovarian syndrome, or type 2 diabetes; and whether they had ever been pregnant, the outcome of each pregnancy (miscarriage, induced abortion, livebirth), and whether the pregnancy had been planned. We calculated body mass index. In PRESTO, participants also reported their race and ethnicity at baseline. Education and household income were determined differently in the Danish and North American cohorts. To pool the data, we developed similar categories for each cohort by dichotomizing household income at $50 000 (Danish Kr313 845; £38 250; €42 172) per year for the PRESTO cohort and Kr300 000 (£6092; $7963; €6717) per year for the Snart Foraeldre and Snart Gravid studies. Education was reported as years of education after compulsory schooling in the Snart Foraeldre and Snart Gravid studies and as overall years of schooling in PRESTO, and categorized accordingly.Statistical analysisWomen contributed at risk cycles to the analysis from study entry until they reported a pregnancy, started fertility treatment, withdrew from the study, stopped trying to conceive, were lost to follow-up, or had 12 cycles of trying to conceive, whichever occurred first. We used life table methods to calculate the percentage of couples who conceived during six and 12 cycles of follow-up, accounting for censoring events.13 We used proportional probability regression models to calculate fecundability ratios with 95% confidence intervals.14 The fecundability ratio is a measure of the average probability of conception per cycle comparing users of a specific contraceptive method with a reference group. Proportional probability models adjust for cycle at risk, taking into account the average decline in fecundability as fertile couples conceive and are removed from the population at risk over time.14 We used the Andersen-Gill data structure to account for left truncation bias that might result from women entering the study after at least one cycle of trying to conceive.1516 For example, participants that entered the study after one cycle of trying to conceive, and conceived during the fifth cycle, contributed cycles two to five to the analysis.We first examined the association between fecundability—the probability of conception per cycle—and use of oral contraceptives (combined and progestin only), hormonal intrauterine devices, copper intrauterine devices, rings, implants, patches, injectable contraceptives, and natural methods as the last method of contraception compared with barrier methods. We selected barrier methods as the reference group because: use of barrier methods would not be expected to cause changes in the vaginal environment or hormone concentrations, offering a well defined contrast with the use of hormonal methods; a large proportion of couples in our study used barrier methods; and we could compare our findings with previous studies that used the same reference category. We then examined fecundability after the use of hormonal intrauterine devices compared with copper intrauterine devices. To quantify delay in return of fertility for each method of contraception, we examined fecundability in each menstrual cycle when participants were trying to conceive. We considered the return of fertility to occur during the cycle in which fecundability for users of a specific method was not meaningfully lower than that for users of barrier methods (that is, adjusted fecundability ratio >0.90). Lastly, we examined the total length of use of each hormonal method. Total length of contraceptive use was divided into two year categories and compared with less than two years of use. In the Snart Foraeldre and Snart Gravid studies, this analysis was conducted only for oral contraceptives because of limited data on length of use.Models were adjusted for potential confounders measured in the three studies and selected a priori based on the literature and a directed acyclic graph. Potential confounders included cohort (Snart Gravid, Snart Foraeldre, PRESTO); age (<25, 25-29, 30-34, ≥35); education (≤12, 13-15, 16, or ≥17 years in North America or fundamental education, technical education or less than three years of higher education, three to four years of higher education, or greater than four years of higher education in Denmark); non-Hispanic white race and ethnicity (yes v no); household income (<v ≥$50 000/Kr300 000 annually); current smoker (yes v no); body mass index (<25, 25-29, ≥30); baseline intercourse frequency (less than one, one to three, greater than three times a week); trying to improve the chances of conception (yes v no); physician diagnosed diabetes (yes v no); and lifetime length of use of hormonal contraceptives in months (oral contraceptives only in the Snart Gravid and Snart Foraeldre studies). 